it's good to see you okay let's go q sir
appreciate it you've been told I think
that we are doing a documentary we went
across a good part of the country to
places where you'd given speeches over
the years to just talk with people about
how their lives have changed it sounds
great I'm going to listen to this one
that's kinda preciate that and that's
the beginning of our discussion right
here although we'll range a little bit
farther this caused me to go back and
look at some of your speeches and there
was one in st. Charles Missouri in 2010
in which you said let's face it people
have lost faith in government that it
started before you were president and
it's getting worse yeah do the events of
this year suggest that it's getting even
worse I'm not sure if it is getting even
worse I think that there has been a
steady growth in people's cynicism about
institutions generally and government in
particular and some of it is justified
because we've got a Congress that's been
dysfunctional now for quite some time
and can't seem to organize itself to
solve problems you now have a Republican
Congress they control both chambers and
they can't even pass their own agenda
much less pass something that has
bipartisan support and at a time when
there are a lot of big issues out there
people feel as if things aren't working
the way they should
having said that not all of the cysts
ISM is justified so even without
Congress cooperating we've been able to
make big progress on a whole range of
issues and I think people are seeing
that when government makes smart
decisions it actually has
significant impact and part of my hope
during the course of this election is
that it's clarifying that people say all
right here's what each party stands for
years what each presidential candidate
and various congressional candidates
stand for if we're going to move forward
in a democracy then the ultimate arbiter
of making things work is the voter and
putting people in charge who were
serious about America's business as
opposed to just playing to various
narrow constituency groups if some of
the cynicism is not justified are you
concerned that voters this year will go
too far in overturning things you know
ultimately I have confidence in our
voters of you know if you look at
American history there have been times
where we've taken some tough turns
primarily fed by fear and disruptions
and dislocations but with a very
substantial exception of the Civil War
generally speaking the democratic
process muddled through and we emerged
better and stronger than we were before
and I have no doubt that the same thing
will happen this time but I do think
that part of what has changed during the
course of my presidency I've seen it is
the splintering of media the power of
social media and the Internet has
turbocharged what previously might have
been marginal views or marginal groups
has made it harder to generate consensus
because people aren't looking at the
same set of facts there I've said this
before if you're watching Fox News you
have a different set of facts than here
reading the New York Times a editorial
page and and that I think has led or
increased the polarization and that
makes it harder for people to sort
through
who's telling the truth and how we
actually get stuff done me yes no mr.
president you still get the biggest
megaphone people can even see you on Fox
News if you've been president for almost
seven and a half years and people have
still no faith in government are you
accountable for that well look as a
general proposition I don't spend a lot
of time looking at polls but I will
what's interesting is is right now
there's a poll you like Thomas well
right right now I think the majority of
the American people think that I'm doing
a good job that does not necessarily
give me a lot of comfort if I can't move
this Congress forward and the question
then becomes and I've heard some people
in the Republican Party suggest that in
some fashion I'm responsible for what's
happened to them and the rise of Trump
and the dysfunction that you see in
their party generally what I would say
is that I came into office wanting to
work on a bipartisan basis and if you've
looked at my old speeches you would see
that they made determination that it was
good politics to oppose everything that
I did the problem was is that by
opposing everything I did even things
that previously they had been for it
pushed their party further and further
to the right and look at the risk of
sounding partisan but I believe if you
look at the facts that this is a pretty
accurate description when we talk about
dysfunction in government it's not as if
both parties are equally dysfunctional
the Democrats have a pretty well
thought-through agenda when we were
governing in the first two years of my
administration we got a lot done
we were probably as productive as any
any Congress in 20 34 years you have a
particular problem in the Republican
Party right now that needs to get sorted
through now that's not unique in the
annals of American history there have
been times where the Democrats were
wrapped around the axle and extreme
wings were setting the agenda and I
think the Republicans will get out of
this I don't think that it is something
that you know will last the next 10 15
20 years but right now at least partly
in reaction to my presidency and the
political decisions that they made they
find themselves having created an
atmosphere in which even somebody like
Paul Ryan is viewed as not sufficiently
conservative or if he does just some of
the basic work of governance that
somehow he's betrayed you know the basin
and is decried as as a Republican in
name only and and when you have that
kind of environment it's very hard to
get the kind of cooperation that is
necessary for us to solve problems that
people are concerned about them that I'm
assuming during the course of your
conversation conversation is that
they've raised repeatedly let me ask
about one of those concerns in Kansas we
spoke with a woman named Heather gray
who said 16 years ago I was making $10
an hour right today she said I make $10
an hour the problem of stagnant wages of
course did not start with your
presidency yeah but it hasn't improved
much right why not well we've got some
long-term trends that we have to battle
and when I came into office we were in
the midst of the worst financial crisis
since the Great Depression
we have successfully dug ourselves out
of that hole and the country has but the
wages have not even understood I'm going
to answer your question okay okay yeah
just give it a little context here okay
so we had unemployment at 10 percent
it's now below 5 we had a housing market
that can play
we collapsed it's now normalized we had
a situation in which people have lost
trillions of dollars in in wealth in
their 401ks and they were recovered in
fact Americans have wha gotten back
about thirty trillion dollars worth of
wealth since since I came into office so
by every measure the economy has
improved but the long-term trends that
had occurred before I took office and
have continued is a combination of
globalization and automation leading to
more downward pressure on wages because
you need fewer workers to make a certain
amount of stuff and entire job sectors
being shrunk or eliminated more and more
people going into the service sector and
in the service sector historically wages
have been lower and that's all been
compounded by some very specific
policies both of the federal in the
state level that's made it harder for
workers to organize and get more
leverage to get higher wages this is why
we fought for higher minimum wages this
is why we've fought for making it easier
to collectively bargain this is why I
think it is so important that as we move
forward if we are going to benefit from
all the huge productivity increases and
you know efficiencies that arise out of
the global supply chain and automated
everything then we're going to have to
redesign that social compact to make
sure that everybody's getting a decent
wage and that is possible to do it's not
as if we need you know a radical
restructuring of the economy if if we
had a minimum wage that required
everybody to get be above poverty if
they're working full-time that would go
a long way towards alleviating some of
the trends that you've talked about and
in fact we've seen wage growth
now begin to occur over the last couple
of years but it's not happening as fast
as it should there is a writer for the
Financial Times Philip Stevens who wrote
something interesting after Britain
voted to leave the European Union last
week he wrote in a column globalization
is not working that it may make
countries richer but the majority of
people are not benefiting he was writing
about Britain but you mentioned
globalization in the context to the
United States is he right globalization
isn't working I think he's right that
what you're seeing across the advanced
economies is that when you have
globalization and suddenly there's
competition from everywhere that
empowers people who have a lot of skills
can use the internet suddenly they have
access to all the markets and what that
means is if you're very good at
something if you are LeBron James or you
are Seinfeld or you are Steve Jobs then
suddenly you can leverage your skills in
ways that you could never do before if
you are a manual worker and are doing
work that can be replaced not just by a
lower wage worker somewhere else but
more frequently by machine then you're
in a tougher spot because you now are
competing against the entire world
instead of just the people who live
around you and that's why it's so
important for us to think about how do
we make sure that everybody is
participating in that global economy if
you continue on the current trends then
what you're going to see is a continuing
increase in inequality and that is not
going to be economically sustainable
because it turns out that the economy
works best when everybody has a stake in
it and workers have money in their
pockets and are spending it and that's
good for business but it's also not
politically sustainable because people
start
and frustrated and they start getting
resentful and I think you see that
somewhat in the brexit boat you see some
of it in both the Sanders campaign and
the the Trump campaign people feeling as
if we are potentially being left behind
now the question then is what's the
prognosis or what's what's the cure to
this whole thing and the notion is that
from my perspective we're not going to
suddenly eliminate the global supply
chain we're not going to disentangle the
world economy it's just too integrated
now by virtue of technology and the
Internet and so what we have to do is to
make sure that wages around the world
are beginning to rise that environmental
standards around the world are beginning
to rise that within our own countries we
are providing the education that people
need to compete in this global economy
with new skills for the new industries
that are out there that we invest more
in things like infrastructure that make
us competitive and also by the way can't
be shipped away the issue is not that
the world shrinking and globalization is
inherently a bad thing I actually think
that over time it can raise everybody's
living standards and create a more
peaceful world but if you do it in a way
that where the benefits of globalization
are only for the elites who are flying
around from capital to capital
and looking at their investment
portfolios on on a laptop or a computer
screen and they're not worrying they
feel this disengaged from their national
economies and their national workers and
the national communities then you're
going to see a reaction to it Donald
Trump talked about global elites after
the vote in Britain is Trump right then
that there are big parallels between
what motivated the British vote and what
people are feeling and thinking about in
the election this year in the United
States well first of all I think it's
important
remember that mr. Trump embodies couple
elites and has taken full advantage of
it his entire life and so he's hardly a
spokesperson for a legitimate
spokesperson for a populist surge from
working-class people on either side of
the Atlantic I think that some of the
concerns around the immigration some of
the concerns around a loss of control or
a loss of national identity those are
similar I think there's a xenophobia an
anti-immigrant sentiment that is that's
flashing up not just in Great Britain
but throughout Europe that has some
parallels with what mr. Trump has been
trying to stir up here having said all
that the US economy has not only
recovered but we're about 10 percent
larger than we were pre crisis when I
came into office and Europe is just now
beginning to get back to where it was
pre crisis you've had a decade of
stagnation there partly because of
austerity measures that we did not
duplicate the Republicans attempted to
impose those kinds of strategies here
and I resisted them and I would argue
that that's part of the reason why we
did a lot better we reformed our banking
system a lot faster and so overall I
think that the differences are greater
than the similarities but what is
absolutely true is that the ability to
tap into a fear that people may have
about losing control and to offer some
sort of vague nostalgic feelings about
how you know will make Britain greater
ground again or will make America great
again and the subtext for that is
somehow that
a bunch of foreigners and funny-looking
people are coming in here and changing
the basic character of the nation I
think that some of that is is out there
yeah both in Europe and in the United
States and again that's not unique to
England you've seen in the lepen party
in France you see it and some of the
far-right parties in other parts of
Europe as well you mentioned people
fearful of change the way that voters
express that when we talk with them as
they're concerned about changing the
traditions values or institutions of
this country that have made the country
great over time immigrants do bring new
ideas new cultures different religions
other things
does it matter particularly if they do
change the country well I think that
there's some bedrock values that
shouldn't change and in fact haven't
changed it's the immigrants that change
not the values themselves the values of
our Constitution and the Bill of Rights
the values of free speech
the values of religious tolerance the
values of pluralism the values of us
being a nation of immigrants that can
absorb people from every corner of the
world and yet at the end of the day
because we all pledge allegiance to a
flag and a Creed we become one those
traditions should not change
I think ironically that if you look at
the values that immigrants bring when
they come here
whether they're coming from Poland or
Italy or now Vietnam or South Korea or
India the values they bring are
quintessentially American values there's
strivers values there are the values
that say we're going to make something
of ourselves regardless of the station
in which we were born when you look at
second-generation immigrants or third
generation immigrants they are
as American as any kid here and that's
been our strength that's part of what
separates us from the United Kingdom or
Europe is we've had that tradition of
being a nation of immigrants and so you
know when people are concerned about
some of the changes that immigrants may
bring they need to go back and read what
people were saying about their
grandparents or great-grandparents when
they came you read about the description
of Irish who arrived and the language
that is being used is identical to the
language that mr. Trump uses about
Mexicans you know when southern
Europeans were coming instead of
Northern Europeans there was absolute
certainty that America was going down
the tubes because these swarthy you know
folks were were coming here and they had
different attitudes and Catholics were
coming which meant that the Pope was
going to control us and this kind of
xenophobia is part of the American
tradition and the good news is is that
you know after these spasms of it
it typically fades away because the
immigrants who come here in fact are
coming here precisely to embrace the
opportunities of being American a couple
of follow-ups one on each side of the
Atlantic is there a danger that Europe
after this brexit vote will turn inward
focus increasingly on his own problems
its own turmoil and be less active in
the world well I think that the best way
to think about this is a pause button
has been pressed on the project of full
European integration
I would not overstate it there's been a
little bit of hysteria post brexit vote
as if somehow NATO is gone the
transatlantic alliance is dissolving and
every countries rushing off to its own
corner that's not what's happening
what's happening is that you had a
European project that was probably
moving faster and without as much
consensus as it should have you have a
monetary union although England wasn't a
part of that that was always going to be
difficult to manage because the economy
in Germany is very different than the
economy in Italy or Greece and you have
a European Union government in Brussels
that because it needs consensus from you
know more than more in a couple dozen
countries often times seems overly
bureaucratic and deadlocked and I think
this will be a moment in which all of
Europe says alright let's take a breath
and let's figure out how do we maintain
some of our national identities how do
we preserve the benefits of integration
and how do we deal with some of the
frustrations that our own voters are
feeling but the basic core values of
Europe the the tenants of liberal
market-based democracies those aren't
changing the interests that we have in
common with Europe remain the same and
our concerns internationally are the
same so Europe can't afford to turn in
we're going to have to worry about
working with us on the Middle East and
they're gonna have to worry about us
working together to deal with an
aggressive Russia they're going to have
to deal with us with respect to how do
we continue to uphold international
rules and norms around the world that
have served both the US and Europe very
well and so I don't anticipate that
there's going to be major cataclysmic
changes as a consequence of this keep in
mind that Norway is not a member of the
European Union but Norway is one of our
closest allies
they align themselves on almost every
issue with Europe and us they are a
place that is continually supporting the
kinds of initiatives internationally
that we support and if over the course
of what is going to be at least a two
year negotiation between England and
Europe Great Britain ends up being
affiliated to Europe like Norway is the
average person is not going to notice a
big church should Britain vote again
as summer suggests I think that's
entirely up to the okay on this side of
the Atlantic we heard from a number of
people about immigration when we
travelled across the country one of them
was a man named jose luis valdez he's a
business owner a restaurant owner in
kansas city kansas he's a new citizen so
he's getting ready to vote for the first
time but he's followed politics for a
long time he knows that you won the
Latino vote very heavily in both your
elections and speaking about the failure
to pass immigration reform he said of
you he used us he used our votes felt
you should have done it when you had a
chance we had a Democratic Congress you
should have done more yeah what would
you say to him well what I'd say to him
is his restaurant might not be doing so
well if I hadn't focused my first two
years on saving the economy so it's not
as if I didn't have anything else to do
and I think it'd be pretty hard to argue
that I haven't put everything I've had
into getting this done but you know one
of the things that I have learned in
this presidency is that until you get
something done people are going to be
frustrated you think of the incredible
progress that we've made during the
course of my presidency with respect to
LGBT rights the rights of gays lesbians
bisexuals transgender the historic speed
with which we've consolidated equal
treatment for
that population is been amazing and you
know these days if I go before an LGBT
crowd you know people are cheering and
saying I'm have been one of their
greatest champions but it was only about
three or four years ago when I get
heckled in some LGBT events because
marriage equality hadn't gotten done yet
or before that Don't Ask Don't Tell
hadn't gotten done yet and it didn't
matter how many times I told him look
you know it's it's it's going to get
done it's just it turns out that the
wheels and democracy don't always move
as quickly as you'd hope and I can't
just do these things with a stroke of
the pen you know that's that's sort of
the nature of all social change here and
so if you if you were interviewing one
of the DREAM Act kids who over the last
several years have been able to get a
driver's license a permit to work are
going to school have joined our military
they'd they wouldn't say that they'd
been used they would say thank you and I
think that's the the reason the vast
majority of Latino voters continue to
support me because they see the effort
that's been put in now one last point
I'll make because I write after this
most recent Supreme ruling or lack of
ruling came down because we have 4/4
time I said to them look everything's
teed up and instead of despairing you
just need to understand we got four
months five months and you've got a very
clear choice between two candidates one
of whom not only supports all the
initiatives that I've put forward but is
going to be in a position if I don't get
a ninth Supreme Court justice to break
that tie and to one way or another by
next year we're going to have either my
administrative solution to immigration
reform done it will be in train because
it will have been decided on
and and will no longer be blocked or
alternatively you know mr. Trump will
win in which case you will have a whole
bunch of other problems on our hands
with respect to immigration so in some
ways this is how the democratic process
works and I'm constantly reminding young
people who are full of passion that I
want them to keep their passion but
they've got to gird for the fact that it
takes a long time to get stuff done in
this democracy it's not as convenient as
you know people would always like but
this is a big country with a lot of
diverse views let me ask you about a
passionate young person then we met
along the way his name is Kwame Rose he
is an activist now in Baltimore he was
active in the protests after the death
of Freddie gray who was in a police van
and died later as you know and he was
unhappy with the statement that you made
at the time when you were supportive of
peaceful protests but also criticized
what you called criminals and thugs who
had looted stores
he felt that you were being too harsh
and went on to say in our interview that
you were speaking from a position of
privilege his suggestion being that
maybe you didn't quite get what was
going on in the streets what would you
say to him well obviously I don't know
him personally so we'd have to have a
longer conversation I'd what I would say
is that the black lives matter movement
has been hugely important in getting all
of America to see the challenges in the
criminal justice system differently and
I could not be prouder of the activism
that has been involved and it's making a
difference you're seeing it at state and
local levels and the task force that we
pulled together in the wake of Ferguson
has put forward recommendations that
were shaped both by the people who
organized the Ferguson protests as well
as police officers and it turns out that
there's common ground there in terms of
how we can
be smart about crime smart about
policing respectful to all communities
and try to bring some of the racial bias
that exists in the criminal justice
system out of it what I would also say
though is that if somebody is looting
they're looting and the notion that
they're making a political statement is
not always the case because these are
businesses oftentimes owned by
african-americans you have situations in
which suddenly friends of mine in
Baltimore their mothers who are elderly
have to now travel across town to get
their medicines because the local
drugstore got torn up and making excuses
for them I think is a mistake there are
ways of bringing about social change
that are powerful and that have the
ability to pull the country together and
maintain the moral high ground and there
are approaches where I may understand
the frustrations but they're
counterproductive and tearing up your
own neighborhood and stealing is
counterproductive if I were to summarize
what else this young man said I might
say that he feels that he is trying to
overturn what he sees as a racist or
corrupt system and that you've become
part of it yeah look steve-o I think
that you can always find folks who are
going to feel as if change hasn't
happened fast enough that's the nature
of these issues and by virtue of being
present in the United States if there's
a problem out there there's then I'm the
ultimate public official that people
know and if it hasn't gotten fixed in a
couple of weeks and people are going to
say why didn't you fix it
I think I think people would be pretty
hard pressed to not see the efforts that
we put in around criminal justice reform
where we're supporting it fully the
initiatives that we've made with local
mayors and state officials around the
country to reform the criminal justice
system the fact that as president I've
been the first ever to even visit a
federal prison that the positions I've
taken on criminal justice issues are
unprecedented by any president the work
we're doing with commutations is
unprecedented and I've now commuted more
sentences for nonviolent drug offenses
than the last seven or eight presidents
combined but if you're interviewing a 18
or 20 year old or 20 to 22 year old kid
on the streets of Baltimore who is still
feeling frustrated then I'm not going to
be surprised if that frustration is
expressed as part of this project we
also had a look at your 2008 campaign
speech in Philadelphia about race in
which you talked in one passage about
anger in the black community which you
said is sometimes counterproductive but
it's real and there are reasons for it
there's another passage which I hadn't
even noticed before in which you say
there is a similar anger among some in
the white community who don't feel
particularly privileged by their race
and do feel frustrated that they're
losing jobs losing pensions feel like
they're losing ground right looking back
were you describing there the same force
that is driving much of our election
discussion here in 2016 well darling the
election discussion driving 2016 this
has been an ongoing theme in American
history you can go back and
during Jim Crow and segregation and
you've got black sharecroppers who have
nothing and alongside them poor white
farmers who don't have that much more
except for the fact that they're white
and the degree to which a lot of
politics in the south were specifically
designed to make sure that that
sharecropper and that white farmer
didn't get together to question how the
economy was structured and how they both
could benefit I that's that's one of the
oldest stories in American politics
so so it's not surprising that what I
said in 2008 still holds true today it
was true for a long time the nature of
racial bias in this country is unique
and the challenges that African
Americans have faced are aren't operable
Native Americans in this country you
know were burdened by extraordinary bias
and cruelty and as well and and it's
probably not useful to sort of catalogue
every possible groups grievances what is
true though is that as I travel around
the country what a black working class
person has in common with a white
working class person is significant and
what prevents them from voting along the
same lines or working together on the
same projects have to do with the whole
range of cultural and identity issues
which
you know Beibei obviously feel are
important and valid but what I've tried
to do throughout my presidency is get
try to get people to recognize
themselves in each other and that's
probably partly related to my own
upbringing I was raised by a white mom
and white grandparents who you know
never suffered the kinds of
discrimination that their black cohorts
might have experienced but who had their
own struggles who went through a Great
Depression who grandmother who had to
work her way up without ever at college
education starting in the steno pool or
as a secretary to be and and experienced
her own discrimination because of being
a woman and and and so I've seen the
degree to which their struggles are not
been different from Michelle's parents
struggles at least in terms of how they
think about it and and and the similar
values of hoping that their kids are
going to do better and that education is
the key and that everybody's got to work
hard and take responsibility but that
they'd like a government that was more
responsive to clear out some of the
barriers for their advancement and I
believe that our politics when our
politics are at our best is not based on
identity politics but it's based on a
sense that everybody should have a fair
shot and everybody should you know get a
fair shake everybody should be
responsible for doing their fair share
and that theme you'll see in every
speech that I've given since I was
running for the state Senate and it
hasn't changed much now that I'm nearing
the end of my political career somebody
following this year's election might say
well that debates worse
it's got
worse do you see any sign that that
debate is any better that it's moved in
some direction you see it in the younger
generation if you look at the 18 to 30
cohort or the 18 to 40 cohort they have
a very different set of attitudes about
all these issues it's true by the way
around the world we're talking about
brexit now the the younger voter wasn't
fearful of global interdependence they
embrace it they see themselves as being
able to navigate through all these
different worlds you see it when I visit
Vietnam or countries in Africa or Latin
America at the new generation is much
more comfortable with diversity with
connectivity with the fact that change
is constant that they're not going to be
working at one job for 30 years and you
know they want to make sure that they
can get the skills they can get the
access but they see a bright future for
themselves that's where the hope is here
in the United States you talk to young
people it doesn't matter where it
doesn't matter whether they're black
white Latino they're not afraid of the
future
and so you when you look at the the
frustrations and the fear that a Trump
are tapping into you know that's an
earlier generation that feels unsettled
and I think we can be sympathetic and
understanding of the fact that they feel
unsettled but but also recognize that
you know if we get the decisions that
need to be made right then 10 years from
now 20 years from now
we may look back at something like the
Trump campaign as the last vestige of a
kind of politics of us versus them that
really doesn't apply to today and that
one last thing I'd say about this
because you'll you'll hear sometimes
people suggest that well if Democrats
and Republicans had been paying
attention to white working-class voters
than something like Trump would not have
happened well the fact is is that my
administration for example when we
promote a higher minimum wage or
stronger union laws or healthcare for
that matter that's helping that court
that is designed to make sure that they
get a better deal in this economy and
you know one of the things that you've
seen during the course of my presidency
is the the ability the power of a
certain slice of the media to emphasize
to white working-class voters somehow
that these things are not good for you
that this is Obama and his socialist
friends who are trying to take money
from you to give to an undeserving
Mexican immigrant or black welfare mom
and and tapping into deserve an identity
politics that you know is powerful and
oftentimes can work but it is actually
counterproductive and it certainly does
not reflect what we've been trying to do
what is true and what's what's been
interesting to see during this election
cycle is that the Republican Party that
has opposed minimum wages or union laws
or what-have-you
they have a populist insurgency on their
hands and mr. Trump I think is at times
exploited this this gap between what you
know the Republican business community
has promoted and and what their
constituencies are actually looking for
we ran across a statement of yours from
2008 about changing the trajectory of
the country you said that Ronald Reagan
had changed the trajectory of the
country partly because the country was
ready for it it was his moment that John
F Kennedy had done the same thing
because it was the right moment the
country was going in a certain direction
you wanted to see such a moment you
believed there was such a moment for you
in 2008 is there a risk that Donald
Trump could say the same thing in 2016
that he could be the man to change the
trajectory of the country now well if he
won he could say that I'm to say you
think the country might be ready for
that no and I think that will be tested
over the next four months but I think
it's pretty hard to argue that somebody
who almost three-quarters the country
think is unqualified to be President and
as a negative opinion of that is tapping
into the the zeitgeist of the country or
is speaking for a broad base of the
country but we'll find out look that's
what elections are for and that I think
it's important for Democrats
progressives moderates people who care
about our traditions who care about
pluralism who care about tolerance who
care about facts who think climate
change is real who think that we have to
reform our immigration system and
intelligent way who believe that in
women's equality and equality for the
LGBT community I think it's important
for those of us not to be complacent not
to be smug
and the one thing I've tried to do
during the course of my presidency is to
take seriously the objections and the
criticisms and the concerns of people
who didn't vote for me I said on
election night back in Grant Park I'm
president of everybody I've got a
particular point of view I've I don't
make any apologies for it I believe that
if you go back and read my speeches
dating back to 2004 where I first came
to national prominence that there's been
a consistency there that I have done or
tried to do exactly what I said and the
core of that message is the e pluribus
unum out of many one that that we are
better when we are together that I do
not believe in tribalism I do not
believe in stoking divisions and
scapegoating I think that people have
common hopes and common dreams and I
think that America is at its best when
we are unified and working together and
during the course of my presidency
you've seen polarization and division
and all kinds of consternation and
frustration but what you've also seen
quietly is a country that yanked itself
out of a great recession and recovered
as well as any country ever has from
such a massive financial breakdown
you've seen 20 million people have
health insurance that didn't have it
before and health care inflation
actually going down so that you know
we've saved trillions of dollars in cost
relative to what we were expected to be
paying over the course of you know
programs like Medicare and Medicaid what
we've seen is a financial system that is
a lot sounder we see an LGBT community
that is is recognized as equal in ways
that they weren't before you've seen an
entire generation grow up
I think feeling as if the old divisions
don't make sense and you know I feel
pretty confident that as long as we do
the work over the next several months
and then continue that work over the
next several years that we will have
emerged from this era stronger more
prosperous more secure and adhering more
closely to the values and ideals that
make America exceptional last question
mr. president we've gone across the
country we've gone across the country
asking people how their lives have
changed in the last eight years that was
the basic question how was your life
changed in the last eight years well
everybody's teased me about how gray I
am and that's okay my daughters have
that picture of you and Derek Jeter that
was something that was that was some
great but go on go on sir my my
daughters have grown up and I think for
any father out there seeing your kids
come into office when I when I came into
office they were were so much younger
than I realized at the time I think and
for them to be these amazing young women
now that changes your life more than
just about anything it's interesting
though that my fundamental belief in
public service my fundamental belief in
the capacity of politics to to solve
problems my belief in this country is
stronger not weaker I'm less cynical now
than I was I I've been frustrated by
some things that I did not complete that
I couldn't rap and mail and ship but
before I got out of here the immigration
being a good example getting
infrastructure done you know we got to
trillion dollars with infrastructure if
we got working on that now we'd be
growing a lot faster the unemployment
rate be even lower or wages be higher so
there are things that we haven't gotten
done obviously there area's
internationally where you know I've been
enormous ly frustrated you look at Syria
being the most prominent example where
you've got a heartbreaking situation and
not a lot of good choices having said
all that you know if you had told me at
the beginning of my presidency that we
could begin the process of making sure
everybody has health insurance in this
country that we could recover fully from
a terrible economic crisis that you know
we could make sure that Iran doesn't
have a nuclear weapon without having to
launch a war that we could restore
diplomatic relations with Cuba in a way
that didn't just transform our
relationship with Cuba but has put our
relationship with all of Latin America
on its strongest footing maybe in
history if you told me that we could you
know extend democracy to a place like
Burma one of the worst military
dictatorships in the world and that I
could visit there and you'd see millions
of people lining the streets if you told
me that that you could have gay and
lesbian men and women proudly serving in
our military without having to hide who
they were or that you could have a
bipartisan effort to actually reduce
sentences for nonviolent drug offenses
have a cred
little chance of getting through
Congress you tally it up and you'd say
it's not bad for a seven and a half
years worth of work and the stuff that
has not gotten done it's teed up to get
done climate change with the de Paris
agreement 200 countries signed on is a
classic example of how I think about my
work but also the possibilities of
government and politics we haven't
solved climate change because of that
agreement but we've now built an
architecture that allows us gives us a
chance to overtime collectively in an
unprecedented way curb the pollution
that contributes to to climate change
and have we gotten it all done yet no
but have we now given the next president
the next Congress the next generation a
chance to solve it absolutely and and
I've said this before I think of myself
as a as a relay runner I take the baton
sometimes you take the baton and you're
behind in the race and you got to run a
little bit harder to catch up hopefully
by the time you pass on the baton you're
a little bit better positioned in the
race and I think there's a humility that
comes out of this office because you
feel that no matter how much you've done
there's more work to do but I think that
there is a confidence that well-meaning
people working together can can change
the country for the better I've seen it
happen mr. president thanks very much
thank you enjoyed it
you